ARROW-15091: [C++][Doc] Document nodes in C++ streaming execution engine (#12033)
apache/arrow: docs/source/cpp/streaming_execution.rst

    // alive until this future is marked finished.
    Future<> complete = plan->finished();

Constructing ``ExecNode`` using Options

> =======================================

Reviewer: It feels like this should all go _after_ the docs about constructing an ExecPlan below, since that's where the actual code to create an exec node is introduced.

> Using the execution plan we can construct varioud execution queries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the execution plan we can construct various queries. 
```

> To construct such queries, we have provided a set of containers or 

Reviewer: containers -> maybe "building blocks"?

Author: Yeah that sounds better.

referred as :class:`ExecNode` s. These nodes provide the ability to 
construct operations like filtering, projection, join, etc. 

This is the list of :class:`ExecutionNode` s exposed;

1. :class:`SourceNode`
2. :class:`FilterNode`
3. :class:`ProjectNode`
4. :class:`ScalarAggregateNode`
5. :class:`SinkNode`
6. :class:`ConsumingSinkNode`
7. :struct:`OrderBySinkNode`

> 8. SelectK-SinkNode

Reviewer: If some are undocumented, we should add the documentation so we can link them.

That said, I'm not sure how useful the API docs for nodes are, it might even be confusing.

Author: May be we can say about node operation without saying the node names. For instance join operation, filter operation, etc. I think it’s important to expose the available operations ? WDYT?

Reviewer: I think we should just refer to them by their factory names, `"scan"`, `"filter"`, etc. As said below I don't think it really helps to link to the API docs for a node class.

Author: Yes, this would simplify and I can also avoid mentioning the nodes and rather talk about the operation and its options.

Author: Nice suggestion, table is neater and link to additional docs. I will update the docs.

9. Scan-Node
10. :class:`HashJoinNode`
11. Write-Node
12. :class:`UnionNode`

There are a set of :class:`ExecNode` s designed to provide various operations required
in designing a streaming execution plan. 

``SourceNode``
--------------

:struct:`arrow::compute::SourceNode` can be considered as an entry point to create a streaming execution plan. 
A source node can be constructed as follows.

> :class:`arrow::compute::SoureNodeOptions` are used to create the :struct:`arrow::compute::SourceNode`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:class:`arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions` are used to create the :struct:`arrow::compute::SourceNode`. 
```

The :class:`Schema` of the data passing through and a function to generate data 
`std::function<arrow::Future<arrow::util::optional<arrow::compute::ExecBatch>>()>` 
are required to create this option::

    // data generator
    arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>> gen() { ... }
    
    // data schema 
    auto schema = arrow::schema({...})
    
    // source node options
    auto source_node_options = arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions{schema, gen};
    
    // create a source node
    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(arrow::compute::ExecNode * source,
                            arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("source", plan.get(), {}, 

>                             source_node_options));

Reviewer: This isn't valid C++ or clear pesudocode (missing semicolons, also the declaration of `gen`)

Reviewer: The _overall_ thing missing is probably a way to get an `AsyncGenerator<optional<ExecBatch>>` from a `Scanner`, as noted above.

Author: @lidavidm the declation for gen can be included, but we are not 100% sure whether to include the iternal APIs.
I am waitng for that to decide the best way to point out this.

Author: @lidavidm this thread is not yet in the conversation page.

Reviewer: You have to expand the hidden items in the conversation view. Unsubmitted comments don't show up at all for other people, as far as I'm aware.

``FilterNode``
--------------

> :class:`FilterNode`, as the name suggests, provide a container to define a data filtering criteria. 

Reviewer: I think we can be more concise here. Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:class:`FilterNode`, as the name suggests, keeps only rows matching a given expression. 
```

> Filter can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. For instance if the row values

Reviewer: Is there prose documentation on Expression that we can link to? Or a section in the API docs that lists all the helpers like `greater`, `call`, etc.?

Author: Yeah, I see your point. I was also not sure about some other parts I added like this. 
Better to link to a doc if exist or I can create an issue to make one. Let me work on this.

Author: compute.rst contains a some of the function definitions, but not a detailed examples on how to use expressions.

Author: @lidavidm should we add this to a separate PR? (PR including compute.rst and links to this doc?)

> Filter can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. For instance if the row values
> of a particular column needs to be filtered by a boundary value, ex: all values of column b
> greater than 3, can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions` as follows::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Filters can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. For example, if we wish
to keep rows of column ``b`` greater than 3, then we can use the following expression::
```

    // a > 3
    arrow::compute::Expression filter_opt = arrow::compute::greater(
                                  arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), 
																	arrow::compute::literal(3));

Using this option, the filter node can be constructed as follows::																

    // creating filter node
    arrow::compute::ExecNode* filter;
      ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(filter, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("filter", 
                            // plan
                            plan.get(),

>                             // previous input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                            // input node
```

Reviewer: for clarity?

Author: sure. make sense.

                            {scan}, 
                            //filter node options

>                             arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions{filter_opt}));

Reviewer: The code example here could be formatted (e.g. there's random indentation on the macro, and missing indentation for the MakeExecNode call)

``ProjectNode``
---------------

:class:`ProjectNode` executes expressions on input batches and produces new batches. 
Each expression will be evaluated against each batch which is pushed to this 
node to produce a corresponding output column. This is exposed via 

> :class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions` component which requires, 

Reviewer: component -> class? 

We should call a spade a spade and avoid overly vague terminology. Or we can just say, "ProjectNode is created from ProjectNodeOptions which requires..."

Author: Sure, I understand.

> a :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`, names of the project columns (names are not provided, 

Reviewer: nit: "_if_ names are not provided…"

and it takes a vector of expressions, no?

the string representations of exprs will be used) and a boolean flag to determine 

> synchronous/asynchronous nature (by default asynchronous option is set to `true`). 

Reviewer: async_mode should be treated as internal and we shouldn't talk about it.

Reviewer: (It's likely to go away entirely sooner or later.)

Author: Sure, will remove that.

Sample Expression for projection::

    // a * 2 (multiply values in a column by 2)
    arrow::compute::Expression a_times_2 = arrow::compute::call("multiply", 
							{arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), arrow::compute::literal(2)});

Creating a project node::

    arrow::compute::ExecNode *project;
        ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(project, 
            arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("project", 
            // plan
            plan.get(),
            // previous node 
            {scan},
            // project node options 

>             arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions{{a_times_2}}));

Reviewer: Same comments about the formatting here.

Reviewer: Also, the Arrow style guide would declare `arrow::compute::ExecNode* project;`.

> ``ScalarAggregateNode``

Reviewer: General comment: each of these sections can be made more consistent, in terms of wording and structure.

> (node name) does (X). It is constructed from (options class), which requires (parameters). (More description of parameters if necessary)
> 
> For example, to create a (node name) that does (specific example)::
>     (code example follows)

-----------------------

:class:`ScalarAggregateNode` is an :class:`ExecNode` which provides various 
aggregation options. The :class:`arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions` provides the 
container to define the aggregation criterion. These options can be 

> selected from `arrow::compute` options. 

Reviewer: This is rather vague. If we're explaining what a filter is, then we need to explain what an aggregation is. Or vice versa, if we _don't_ explain what an aggregation is, then we shouldn't be explaining a filter, either.

> 1. `ScalarAggregateOptions`

Reviewer: We shouldn't talk about individual options classes here. We should link to the relevant documentation instead. Most of this should actually be in the API docs, and if not, should be moved to documentation comments in the source code.

    // buffer_size: input buffer size, default 500
    // skip_nulls: if true (the default), null values are ignored. Otherwise, if any value is null,
    ////// emit null.
    // min_count: If less than this many non-null values are observed, emit null.
    arrow::compute::TDigestOptions tdigest_option(/*q*/0.5, 
      /*delta*/200, 
      /*buffer_size*/600, 
      /*skip_nulls*/true, 
      /*min_count*/5);

7. IndexOptions

:class:`arrow::compute::IndexOptions` This option controls Index kernel behavior. 
This is used to find the index of a particular scalar value. 

Example::

    arrow::compute::IndexOptions index_options(arrow::MakeScalar("1"));

An example for creating an aggregate node::

    arrow::compute::CountOptions options(arrow::compute::CountOptions::ONLY_VALID);

    auto aggregate_options = arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions{
        /*aggregates=*/{{"hash_count", &options}},
        /*targets=*/{"a"},
        /*names=*/{"count(a)"},
        /*keys=*/{"b"}};

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(cp::ExecNode * aggregate,
                              cp::MakeExecNode("aggregate", plan.get(), {source},
                              aggregate_options));

> Scan-Node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ScanNode``
```

Author: But there is no entity like that in the source code, this was another unclear part. 
The definition set is not consistent. Some of them have a node and some have the 
functionality but a node is not exposed even internally. For instance "MakeScaneNode" 
is not a function exposed.

Reviewer: Yup, I see your point. I think we should just refer to these as "scan", "filter", "project" etc. since users should never need to interact with the actual classes.

Author: Replaced the nodes with `scan`, `project`, etc operations and didn't explicitly discussed about nodes.

---------

> There is no class or struct defined as ScanNode in the source. 

Reviewer: I think this means we should probably not refer to individual node classes, but only to the general node names, since we only expose them via the factory interface. Then the scan node won't be an odd exception.

Reviewer: Also, again, because the API docs for individual node classes are useless at best, and potentially misleading at worst.

Author: I understand. I can modify this into options rather than nodes.

But :class:`arrow::compute::ScanNodeOptions` container includes the options

> passed to `MakeScanNode` internal function which creates an :class:`ExecNode`

Reviewer: We don't need to talk about implementation, only purpose. And actually, we haven't talked about what a scan node even does.

Reviewer: We should also link to the general datasets documentation, and perhaps directly to the section about scanning.

Author: linked.

performing the defined task. This component includes a few options,
defined in the :class:`arrow::compute::ScanNodeOptions` and this requires, 
`std::shared_ptr<arrow::dataset::Dataset>`, 
`std::shared_ptr<arrow::compute::ScanOptions>`, 

> `std::shared_ptr<arrow::util::AsyncToggle>`. 

Reviewer: Hmm. Do we even want to document the scan node, given it has this internal parameter that users can't really provide?

Reviewer: I guess in general, now I'm questioning the goals of what we're documenting here, since a lot of this is inaccessible or confusing to users. And if it's meant as developer documentation, I wonder if there's a better place for it, or if the focus shouldn't be on the documentation comments themselves.

Author: I see your point. May be I can move some of these stuff to a notion page for internal reference. 
And keep a neater high level details for the user. This documentation is meant to be a user doc.

Reviewer: We shouldn't keep documentation internal just because it is user facing (we may work for the same place, but we should remember that this is an open-source project with contributors from different organizations). I think if there's anything useful to say about these options, they should be in doc comments in the source.

Reviewer 2: `AsyncToggle` is optional and it does not need to be provided (and now I'm wondering why it is part of scan node and not source node).  I do think we want to document scan node (just leave that option out).

> The :class:`arrow::compute::ScanOptions` includes the scaning options::

Reviewer: The code block here is rather confusing. Also, we haven't explained what the parameters are.

Reviewer 2: If we link to the documentation on dataset scanning then we don't need to do a lot of explaining around what `ScanOptions` are.  Just assume the user is starting with a dataset and some scan options.  I also think we can avoid any examples of augmented fields.

            }
        }

        std::vector<arrow::compute::Expression> exprs;
        for (const auto& name : names) {
            exprs.push_back(arrow::compute::field_ref(name));
        }

        return arrow::compute::project(exprs, names);
    }

    auto options = std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::ScanOptions>();
    // sync scanning is not supported by ScanNode
    options->use_async = true;
    options->projection = Materialize({});  // create empty projection

    // construct the scan node
    cp::ExecNode* scan;
    auto scan_node_options = arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions{
                              /*dataset*/dataset, 
                              /*scan_options*/options};

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(scan,
                            arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("scan", 
                              plan.get(), 
                              {}, 
                              scan_node_options));

``SinkNode``
------------

:class:`SinkNode` can be considered as the output or final node of an streaming 
execution definition. :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions` interface is used to pass 
the required options. Requires 

> `std::function<arrow::Future<arrow::util::optional<arrow::compute::ExecBatch>>()>* generator`

Reviewer: Note that this has a user-friendly alias, `function<Future<T>()>` can be written as `arrow::AsyncGenerator<T>`

Reviewer 2: Ah, but I don't know if `AsyncGenerator` is an external alias.  I could go either way.

The output can be obtained as a table::

    // // // translate sink_gen (async) to sink_reader (sync)
    std::shared_ptr<arrow::RecordBatchReader> sink_reader = cp::MakeGeneratorReader(
      basic_data.schema, std::move(sink_gen), exec_context.memory_pool());

    // // validate the ExecPlan
    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(plan->Validate());
    std::cout << "Exec Plan Created: " << plan->ToString() << std::endl;
    // // // start the ExecPlan
    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(plan->StartProducing());

    // // collect sink_reader into a Table
    std::shared_ptr<arrow::Table> response_table;

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(response_table,
                        arrow::Table::FromRecordBatchReader(sink_reader.get()));

    std::cout << "Results : " << response_table->ToString() << std::endl;

``ConsumingSinkNode``
---------------------

:class:`arrow::compute::ConsumingSinkNode` is a sink node that owns consuming the data and 
will not finish until the consumption is finished.  Use SinkNode if you are
transferring the ownership of the data to another system.  
Use :class:`arrow::compute::ConsumingSinkNode` if the data is being consumed within the exec 

> plan (i.e. the exec plan should not complete until the consumption has completed).

Reviewer: This is nearly tautological. I think the general purpose is that `ConsumingSinkNode` is used to consume the output within the exec plan, instead of getting a stream of batches to read.

Author: Yes, I missed this point. I went through the code and you're correct.

    std::atomic<uint32_t> batches_seen{0};
    arrow::Future<> finish = arrow::Future<>::Make();
    struct CustomSinkNodeConsumer : public cp::SinkNodeConsumer {

        CustomSinkNodeConsumer(std::atomic<uint32_t> *batches_seen, arrow::Future<>finish): 
        batches_seen(batches_seen), finish(std::move(finish)) {}
        // Consumption logic can be written here
        arrow::Status Consume(cp::ExecBatch batch) override {
        // data can be consumed in the expected way
        // transfer to another system or just do some work 
        // and write to disk
        (*batches_seen)++;
        return arrow::Status::OK();
        }

        arrow::Future<> Finish() override { return finish; }

        std::atomic<uint32_t> *batches_seen;
        arrow::Future<> finish;
        
    };
    
    std::shared_ptr<CustomSinkNodeConsumer> consumer =
            std::make_shared<CustomSinkNodeConsumer>(&batches_seen, finish);

    arrow::compute::ExecNode *consuming_sink;

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(consuming_sink, MakeExecNode("consuming_sink", plan.get(),
        {source}, cp::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions(consumer)));

``OrderBySinkNode``
-------------------

> This is an extension to the :class:`SinkNode` definition and provides the ability
> to guarantee the ordering of the stream by providing the,
> :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`. 
> Here the :class:`arrow::compute::SortOptions` are provided to define which columns 
> are used for sorting and under which criterion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is variant of :class:`SinkNode` that sorts the results according to
:class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`. 
Here :class:`arrow::compute::SortOptions` are provided to define which columns 
are used for sorting and whether to sort by ascending or descending values.
```

Author: From the description, omitted the node related descriptions, just made the connection via the operation type.

Example::

    arrow::compute::ExecNode *sink;

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink,
    arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("order_by_sink", plan.get(),
    {source}, 
    arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions{
    /*sort_options*/arrow::compute::SortOptions{
    {	arrow::compute::SortKey{
    //Column key(s) to order by and how to order by these sort keys.
    "a",
    // Sort Order
    arrow::compute::SortOrder::Descending 
    }}},&sink_gen}));

SelectK-Node
------------

There is no Select-K-SinkNode available as an entity within the source, but the behavior 
is defined with the options :class:`arrow::compute::SelectKOptions` which is a defined by 
using :struct:`OrderBySinkNode` definition. This option returns a sink node that receives 
inputs and then compute top_k/bottom_k.

Example::

    arrow::compute::SelectKOptions options = arrow::compute::SelectKOptions::TopKDefault(
                /*k=*/2, {"i32"});

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(
      arrow::compute::ExecNode * k_sink_node,
      arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("select_k_sink",
        plan.get(), {source},
        arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions{options, &sink_gen}));

> Scan-Node

Reviewer: Didn't we talk about scan node above?

---------

There is no definition Scan-Node in the source, but the behavior of is defined using 
:class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`. This option contains a set of definitions. 

Option definitions for :class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`:: 

>     /// A row filter (which will be pushed down to partitioning/reading if supported).

Reviewer: This is formatted oddly, plus, this all comes from ScanOptions, no?

    /// io_context.executor
    /// Note: This  must be true in order for any readahead to happen
    bool use_threads = false;

    /// If true then an asycnhronous implementation of the scanner will be used.
    /// This implementation is newer and generally performs better.  However, it
    /// makes extensive use of threading and is still considered experimental
    bool use_async = false;

    /// Fragment-specific scan options.
    // Some implemented FragementScanOptions are;
    // CsvFragmentScanOptions, IpcFragmentScanOptions, ParquetFragmentScanOptions
    std::shared_ptr<arrow::dataset::FragmentScanOptions> fragment_scan_options;

Creating a Scan `ExecNode`::

    auto options = std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::ScanOptions>();
    options->use_async = true; 
    options->projection = Materialize({});  // create empty projection

    // construct the scan node
    cp::ExecNode* scan;
    auto scan_node_options = arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions{dataset, options};

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(scan,
                            cp::MakeExecNode("scan", plan.get(), {}, 
                              scan_node_options));

Write-Node
----------

> The option to write a result to a file format is provided by this execution node type. 

Reviewer: > The "write" node writes the results of a query into files on disk. Options for file format (Feather, CSV, Parquet, etc.), partitioning scheme, and so on are provided.

A definition doesn't exist as an :class:`ExecNode`, but the write options are provided
via the :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions` and defined using 

> :class::`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions`, `std::shared_ptr<arrow::Schema>`,

Reviewer: We need double backticks here.

    // which creates directories with "key=value" pairs.

    auto partitioning =
    std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::HivePartitioning>(partition_schema);
    // We'll write Parquet files.
    auto format = std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::ParquetFileFormat>();

    arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions write_options;
    write_options.file_write_options = format->DefaultWriteOptions();
    write_options.filesystem = filesystem;
    write_options.base_dir = base_path;
    write_options.partitioning = partitioning;
    write_options.basename_template = "part{i}.parquet";

    arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions write_node_options {write_options,
    dataset->schema()};

Creating a `write` `ExecNode`::

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(cp::ExecNode *wr, cp::MakeExecNode("write", plan.get(),
        {scan}, write_node_options));

    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(wr->Validate());
    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(plan->Validate());
    // // // start the ExecPlan
    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(plan->StartProducing());
    plan->finished().Wait(); // make sure to add this method 

``UnionNode``
-------------

:class:`UnionNode` is the :class:`ExecNode` interface to perform a union 

> operation on two datasets. The union operation can be executed

Reviewer: This can be confusing given the various uses of union in SQL. Specifically, UnionNode combines two streams of data with the same schema into one, and does not modify or look at any of the data itself.

:class:`ExecNode` is the component we use as a building block 
containing in-built operations with various functionalities. 

This is the list of operations associated with the execution plan:

.. list-table:: Operations and Options
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Operation
     - Options
   * - ``source``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions`
   * - ``filter``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions`
   * - ``project``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions`
   * - ``aggregate``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions`
   * - ``sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``consuming_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``order_by_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``select_k_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``scan``
     - :class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions` 
   * - ``hash_join``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::HashJoinNodeOptions`
   * - ``write``
     - :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions`
   * - ``union``
     - N/A

.. _stream_execution_source_docs:

``source``
----------

> A `source` operation can be considered as an entry point to create a streaming execution plan. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ``source`` operation can be considered as an entry point to create a streaming execution plan. 
```

Reviewer: There's some other instances of this below

     - :class:`arrow::compute::ScalarAggregateOptions`
   * - ``sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``consuming_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``order_by_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``select_k_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``scan``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ScanNodeOptions` 
   * - ``hash_join``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::HashJoinNodeOptions`
   * - ``write``
     - :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions`
   * - ``union``
     - N/A

.. _stream_execution_source_docs:

``source``
----------

`source` operation can be considered as an entry point to create a streaming execution plan. 
A source node can be constructed as follows.
:class:`arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions` are used to create the ``source`` operation. 
The :class:`Schema` of the data passing through and a function to generate data 
``arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>>``
are required to create this option. Additionally, when using `source` operator, 
the data scanning operations like filter and project may need to be applied

> in a later part of the execution plan. 

Author: @westonpace 100% agree. For now let's update the documentation with this nice description, but later on I can update the documentation with new methods like "from_table".

Struct to hold the data generator definition;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: BatchesWithSchema Definition)
  :end-before: (Doc section: BatchesWithSchema Definition)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

Generating Batches for computation;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: MakeBasicBatches Definition)
  :end-before: (Doc section: MakeBasicBatches Definition)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

Example of using ``source`` (usage of sink is explained in detail in :ref:`sink<stream_execution_sink_docs>`);

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Source Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Source Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_filter_docs:

``filter``
----------

> ``filter`` operation as the name suggests, provides an option to define a data filtering
> criteria. It keeps only rows matching a given expression. 
> Filters can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. 
> For example, if we wish to keep rows of column ``b`` greater than 3, 
> then we can use the following expression::, can be written using 
> :class:`arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions` as follows::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``filter`` operation, as the name suggests, provides an option to define data filtering
criteria. It selects rows matching a given expression. 
Filters can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. 
For example, if we wish to keep rows where the value of column ``b``
is greater than 3,  then we can use the following expression:: 
```

Wording

Author: neat 👍

  // a > 3
  arrow::compute::Expression filter_opt = arrow::compute::greater(
                                arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), 
                                arrow::compute::literal(3));

Using this option, the filter node can be constructed as follows::																

  // creating filter node
  arrow::compute::ExecNode* filter;
    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(filter, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("filter", 
                          // plan
                          plan.get(),
                          // previous node
                          {scan}, 
                          //filter node options
                          arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions{filter_opt}));

> Filter Example;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filter Example:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Filter Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Filter Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_project_docs:

``project``
-----------

``project`` operation rearranges, deletes, transforms, and creates columns.
Each output column is computed by evaluating an expression
against the source record batch. This is exposed via 

> :class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions` class which requires, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions` which requires, 
```

> a :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`, names for the output columns (if names are not
> provided, the string representations of exprs will be used). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an :class:`arrow::compute::Expression` and name for each of the output columns (if names are not
provided, the string representations of exprs will be used). 
```

Sample Expression for projection::

  // a * 2 (multiply values in a column by 2)
  arrow::compute::Expression a_times_2 = arrow::compute::call("multiply", 
            {arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), arrow::compute::literal(2)});

Creating a project node::

  arrow::compute::ExecNode* project;
      ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(project, 
          arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("project", 
          // plan
          plan.get(),
          // previous node 
          {scan},
          // project node options 
          arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions{{a_times_2}}));

Project Example;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Project Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Project Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_aggregate_docs:

``aggregate``
-------------

``aggregate`` operation provides various data aggregation options. 
The :class:`arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions` is used to 

> define the aggregation criterion. These options can be 
> selected from :ref:`aggregation options <aggregation-option-list>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
define the aggregation criteria. An aggregate node can first group data by
one or more key columns or the keys can be left off to compute aggregates
across the entire dataset.  Each aggregate node can compute any number of
aggregation functions.  Each aggregation function will be applied to every
field specified as a target.  The aggregation functions can be 
selected from :ref:`this list of aggregation functions <aggregation-option-list>`.

Note: This node is a "pipeline breaker" and will fully materialize the dataset in memory.
In the future, spillover mechanisms will be added which should alleviate this constraint.
```

Just adding a bit more info.

Author: This is very nice :) Updated the code.

Example::

>   arrow::compute::IndexOptions index_options(arrow::MakeScalar("1"));

Reviewer 2: What is this for?

Author: typo from previously deleted options section.

An example for creating an aggregate node::

  arrow::compute::CountOptions options(arrow::compute::CountOptions::ONLY_VALID);

  auto aggregate_options = arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions{
      /*aggregates=*/{{"hash_count", &options}},
      /*targets=*/{"a"},
      /*names=*/{"count(a)"},
      /*keys=*/{"b"}};

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(cp::ExecNode * aggregate,
                            cp::MakeExecNode("aggregate", plan.get(), {source},
                            aggregate_options));

> Aggregate example;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aggregate example:
```

> 
> Filter Example;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: typo.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Aggregate Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Aggregate Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_sink_docs:

``sink``
--------

> ``sink`` operation can be considered as the option providing output or final node of an streaming 
> execution definition. :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions` interface is used to pass 
> the required options. Requires 
> ``arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>>* generator``
> and ``arrow::util::BackpressureOptions backpressure``. 
> An execution plan should only have one "terminal" node (one sink node).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``sink`` operation can be considered as the option providing output or final node of an streaming 
execution definition. :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions` interface is used to pass 
the required options. Requires 
``arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>>* generator``
and ``arrow::util::BackpressureOptions backpressure``. 
An execution plan should only have one "terminal" node (one sink node).
```
```suggestion
``sink`` operation provides output and is the final node of a streaming 
execution definition. :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions` interface is used to pass 
the required options. Similar to the source operator the sink operator exposes the output
with a function that returns a record batch future each time it is called.  It is expected the
caller will repeatedly call this function until the generator function is exhausted (returns
arrow::util::optional::nullopt).  If this function is not called often enough then record batches
will accumulate in memory.  An execution plan should only have one
"terminal" node (one sink node).  An execution plan may "finish" by marking
`exec_plan->finished()` as complete before the sink generator is fully consumed and the
execution plan can be safely destroyed without harming the sink generator (which will hold
references to the unconsumed batches).
```

Let's hide the details of backpressure for the moment.  I added a bit more information.

Author: Sure, I updated the section.

Example::

  arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>> sink_gen;

  arrow::compute::ExecNode* sink;

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("sink", plan.get(), {source},
                                                arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions{&sink_gen}));

As a part of the Source Example, the Sink operation is also included;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Source Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Source Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_consuming_sink_docs:

``consuming_sink``
------------------

> ``consuming_sink`` operator is a sink operation containing consuming operation within the
> execution plan (i.e. the exec plan should not complete until the consumption has completed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``consuming_sink`` operator is a sink operation containing consuming operation within the
execution plan (i.e. the exec plan should not complete until the consumption has completed).
Unlike the `sink` node this node takes in a callback function that is expected to consume the
batch.  Once this callback has finished the execution plan will no longer hold any reference to
the batch.

The consuming function may be called before a previous invocation has completed.  If the consuming
function does not run quickly enough then many concurrent executions could pile up, blocking the
CPU thread pool.  The execution plan will not be marked finished until all consuming function callbacks
have been completed.

Once all batches have been delivered the execution plan will wait for the `finish` future to complete
before marking the execution plan finished.  This allows for workflows where the consumption function
converts batches into async tasks (this is currently done internally for the dataset write node).
```

Some more detail, but I'm half tempted to hide this node.  Just like the `source` node this (and `sink`) are very tricky nodes to use correctly.

Author: Great, this is nice. Updated the docs.

      batches_seen(batches_seen), finish(std::move(finish)) {}
      // Consumption logic can be written here
      arrow::Status Consume(cp::ExecBatch batch) override {
      // data can be consumed in the expected way
      // transfer to another system or just do some work 
      // and write to disk
      (*batches_seen)++;
      return arrow::Status::OK();
      }

      arrow::Future<> Finish() override { return finish; }

      std::atomic<uint32_t> *batches_seen;
      arrow::Future<> finish;
      
  };
  
  std::shared_ptr<CustomSinkNodeConsumer> consumer =
          std::make_shared<CustomSinkNodeConsumer>(&batches_seen, finish);

  arrow::compute::ExecNode *consuming_sink;

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(consuming_sink, MakeExecNode("consuming_sink", plan.get(),
      {source}, cp::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions(consumer)));

Consuming-Sink Example;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: ConsumingSink Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: ConsumingSink Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_order_by_sink_docs:

``order_by_sink``
-----------------

> ``order_by_sink`` operation is an extension to the ``sink`` operation. 
> This operation provides the ability to guarantee the ordering of the 
> stream by providing the :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`. 
> Here the :class:`arrow::compute::SortOptions` are provided to define which columns 
> are used for sorting and whether to sort by ascending or descending values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``order_by_sink`` operation is an extension to the ``sink`` operation. 
This operation provides the ability to guarantee the ordering of the 
stream by providing the :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`. 
Here the :class:`arrow::compute::SortOptions` are provided to define which columns 
are used for sorting and whether to sort by ascending or descending values.

Note: This node is a "pipeline breaker" and will fully materialize the dataset in memory.
In the future, spillover mechanisms will be added which should alleviate this constraint.
```

Example::

  arrow::compute::ExecNode *sink;

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink,
  arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("order_by_sink", plan.get(),
  {source}, 
  arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions{
  /*sort_options*/arrow::compute::SortOptions{
  {	arrow::compute::SortKey{
  //Column key(s) to order by and how to order by these sort keys.
  "a",
  // Sort Order
  arrow::compute::SortOrder::Descending 
  }}},&sink_gen}));

Order-By-Sink Example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: OrderBySink Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: OrderBySink Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_select_k_docs:

``select_k_sink``
-----------------

``select_k_sink`` option enables selecting k number of elements. 
:class:`arrow::compute::SelectKOptions` which is a defined by 
using :struct:`OrderBySinkNode` definition. This option returns a sink node that receives 

> inputs and then compute top_k/bottom_k.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inputs and then compute top_k/bottom_k.

Note: This node is a "pipeline breaker" and will fully materialize the input in memory.
In the future, spillover mechanisms will be added which should alleviate this constraint.
```

Author: updated

Create SelectK Option::

  arrow::compute::SelectKOptions options = arrow::compute::SelectKOptions::TopKDefault(
              /*k=*/2, {"i32"});

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(
    arrow::compute::ExecNode * k_sink_node,
    arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("select_k_sink",
      plan.get(), {source},
      arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions{options, &sink_gen}));

SelectK Example;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: KSelect Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: KSelect Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_scan_docs:

``scan``
---------

> `scan` is an operation used to load and process data, and the behavior of is defined using 
> :class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`. This option contains a set of definitions. 
> The :ref:`dataset<cpp-dataset-reading>` API also use scanner for processing data.
> In contrast to `source` operation, `scan` operation can load the data and apply scanning
> operations like filter and project to the loaded data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`scan` is an operation used to load and process datasets.  It should be preferred over the
more generic `source` node when your input is a dataset.  The behavior is defined using 
:class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`.  More information on datasets and the various
scan options can be found in :ref:`dataset<cpp-dataset-reading>`.

This node is capable of applying pushdown filters to the file readers which reduce
the amount of data that needs to be read.  This means you may supply the same
filter expression to the scan node that you also supply to the FilterNode because
the filtering is done in two different places.
```

Author: updated

Creating a Scan `ExecNode`::

  auto options = std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::ScanOptions>();
  options->use_async = true; 
  options->projection = Materialize({});  // create empty projection

  // construct the scan node
  cp::ExecNode* scan;
  auto scan_node_options = arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions{dataset, options};

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(scan,
                          cp::MakeExecNode("scan", plan.get(), {}, 
                            scan_node_options));

Scan example;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Scan Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Scan Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_write_docs:

``write``
---------

``write`` option enables writing a result to supported file formats (example `parquet`,
`feather`, `csv`, etc). 

> The write options are provided via the :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions` and 
> defined using :class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions`, 
> ``std::shared_ptr<arrow::Schema>``, and 
> ``std::shared_ptr<arrow::util::AsyncToggle> backpressure_toggle``. Here the 
> :class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions` contains the meta-data required 
> to write the data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The write options are provided via the :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions` and 
defined using :class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions`. Here the 
:class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions` contains the meta-data required 
to write the data. 
```

Let's hide backpressure for now (that setting is optional I'm pretty sure).  It's actually a bug (my fault) that we require `schema`.  I think we can remove that in the future so let's skip mentioning it for the moment.

Author: Got it, updated the doc.

Write Example;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Write Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Write Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_union_docs:

``union``
-------------

``union`` is operation performs the union of two datasets. 
The union operation can be executed on multiple data 
sources(:class:`ExecNodes`).

The following example demonstrates how this can be achieved using 
two data sources. Following a union operations the output is obtained using 
a aggregation operation. 

Union Example;

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Union Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Union Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_example_list_docs:

Example List
============

> There a set of examples can be found in ``examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are examples of these nodes which can be found in ``examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc``
```

  arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions{
  /*sort_options*/arrow::compute::SortOptions{
  {	arrow::compute::SortKey{
  //Column key(s) to order by and how to order by these sort keys.
  "a",
  // Sort Order
  arrow::compute::SortOrder::Descending 
  }}},&sink_gen}));

``select_k_sink``
-----------------

``select_k_sink`` option enables selecting k number of elements. 
:class:`arrow::compute::SelectKOptions` which is a defined by 
using :struct:`OrderBySinkNode` definition. This option returns a sink node that receives 
inputs and then compute top_k/bottom_k.

Example::

  arrow::compute::SelectKOptions options = arrow::compute::SelectKOptions::TopKDefault(
              /*k=*/2, {"i32"});

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(
    arrow::compute::ExecNode * k_sink_node,
    arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("select_k_sink",
      plan.get(), {source},
      arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions{options, &sink_gen}));

``scan``
---------

`scan` is an operation used to load and process data, and the behavior of is defined using 
:class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`. This option contains a set of definitions. 
The :ref:`dataset<cpp-dataset-reading>` API also use scanner for processing data.

> Option definitions for :class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`:: 

Reviewer: I still don't think we need/want to copy-paste the definition of ScanOptions into the source here…it will get out of sync right away.

nodes from that dataset. (Useful for a self-join, for example.)
Note that producing two scan nodes like this will perform all
reads and decodes twice.

Constructing ``ExecNode`` using Options
=======================================

Using the execution plan we can construct various queries. 
To construct such queries, we have provided a set of building blocks
referred to as :class:`ExecNode` s. These nodes provide the ability to  

> construct operations like filtering, projection, join, etc. 

Reviewer: We should perhaps also link to the full example somehow for reference. (I'm not sure if we can get Sphinx to generate a page like it does for Python code, but maybe we can just include the full example at the bottom or on a separate page?)

> construct operations like filtering, projection, join, etc. 

Author: I included the full example at the bottom.

This is the list of operations associated with the execution plan:

.. list-table:: Operations and Options
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Operation
     - Options
   * - ``source``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions`
   * - ``filter``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions`
   * - ``project``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions`
   * - ``aggregate``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ScalarAggregateOptions`
   * - ``sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``consuming_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``order_by_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``select_k_sink``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions`
   * - ``scan``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::ScanNodeOptions` 
   * - ``hash_join``
     - :class:`arrow::compute::HashJoinNodeOptions`
   * - ``write``
     - :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions`
   * - ``union``

>      - N/A

Author: the `WriteNodeOptions` works for me and that is included in `arrow/dataset/api.h`
@westonpace as we discussed before I included `arrow/compute/exec/options.h` in `arrow/compute/api.h`
But when I build the html, still it doesn't work (meaning: clickable link to class definition). I assume what @lidavidm referring is the same. @lidavidm please correct me if I am wrong.

>      - N/A

Author: When building I did the `doxygen` thing at `cpp/apidocs` and then `make html` at `docs`.

>      - N/A

Reviewer 2: Hmm...looks like it takes a bit more work to get things into the docs.  This (https://github.com/vibhatha/arrow/pull/1) should do just enough that we can get links.  The reference docs for expressions and exec plans are pretty rough at the moment but lets save cleaning that up for a future PR.

>      - N/A

Author: Thank you @westonpace for this fix.

:class:`arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions` are used to create the ``source`` operation.  The
`source` operation is the most generic and flexible type of source currently available but it can
be quite tricky to configure.  To process data from files the scan operation is likely a simpler choice.
The source node requires some kind of function that can be called to poll for more data.  This
function should take no arguments and should return an
``arrow::Future<std::shared_ptr<arrow::util::optional<arrow::RecordBatch>>>``.
This function might be reading a file, iterating through an in memory structure, or receiving data
from a network connection.  The arrow library refers to these functions as `arrow::AsyncGenerator`
and there are a number of utilities for working with these functions.  For this example we use 
a vector of record batches that we've already stored in memory.
In addition, the schema of the data must be known up front.  Arrow's streaming execution
engine must know the schema of the data at each stage of the execution graph before any
processing has begun.  This means we must supply the schema for a source node separately
from the data itself.

> Struct to hold the data generator definition:

Reviewer: perhaps something like "We define a struct that provides everything we need: the in-memory batches, the schema, and a function that serves as the data generator."

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: BatchesWithSchema Definition)
  :end-before: (Doc section: BatchesWithSchema Definition)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

> Generating sample Batches for computation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generating sample batches for computation:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: MakeBasicBatches Definition)
  :end-before: (Doc section: MakeBasicBatches Definition)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

Example of using ``source`` (usage of sink is explained in detail in :ref:`sink<stream_execution_sink_docs>`):

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Source Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Source Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_filter_docs:

``filter``
----------

``filter`` operation, as the name suggests, provides an option to define data filtering
criteria. It selects rows matching a given expression. 

> Filters can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. 

Reviewer: Hmm, `Expression` also doesn't get resolved for me. We should make sure to add anything that doesn't get resolved to the docs so they show up properly.

Author: Yes, same here it doesn't work for me. 
I included `arrow/compute/exec/expression.h` in `arrow/compute/api.h` as well. 
Is there an additional thing that we need to do to fix this? 
@westonpace what do you think?

For example, if we wish to keep rows where the value of column ``b``

> is greater than 3,  then we can use the following expression:: 

Reviewer: Rather a small nit, but can we consistently line-wrap these paragraphs? Text editors should have a shortcut to do this automatically.

  // a > 3
  arrow::compute::Expression filter_opt = arrow::compute::greater(
                                arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), 
                                arrow::compute::literal(3));

Using this option, the filter node can be constructed as follows::																

  // creating filter node
  arrow::compute::ExecNode* filter;
    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(filter, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("filter", 
                          // plan
                          plan.get(),
                          // previous node
                          {scan}, 
                          //filter node options

>                           arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions{filter_opt}));

Author: I see your point. It is better to remove those comments.

  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Filter Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Filter Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_project_docs:

``project``
-----------

``project`` operation rearranges, deletes, transforms, and creates columns.
Each output column is computed by evaluating an expression
against the source record batch. This is exposed via 
:class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions` which requires,
an :class:`arrow::compute::Expression` and name for each of the output columns (if names are not
provided, the string representations of exprs will be used).  

Sample Expression for projection::

  // a * 2 (multiply values in a column by 2)
  arrow::compute::Expression a_times_2 = arrow::compute::call("multiply", 
            {arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), arrow::compute::literal(2)});

Creating a project node::

  arrow::compute::ExecNode* project;
      ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(project, 
          arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("project", 
          // plan
          plan.get(),
          // previous node 
          {scan},
          // project node options 

>           arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions{{a_times_2}}));

Author: I removed the comments from here. It is already used for an example for projection. 
For source, I just kept a very simple example.

Project example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Project Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Project Example)
  :linenos:

>   :lineno-match:

Author: included as a comment within the code.

.. _stream_execution_aggregate_docs:

``aggregate``
-------------

``aggregate`` operation provides various data aggregation options. 
The :class:`arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions` is used to 
define the aggregation criteria. An aggregate node can first group data by
one or more key columns or the keys can be left off to compute aggregates
across the entire dataset.  Each aggregate node can compute any number of
aggregation functions.  Each aggregation function will be applied to every
field specified as a target.  The aggregation functions can be 
selected from :ref:`this list of aggregation functions <aggregation-option-list>`.
Note: This node is a "pipeline breaker" and will fully materialize the dataset in memory.

> In the future, spillover mechanisms will be added which should alleviate this constraint.

Author: Nice description 👍

An example for creating an aggregate node::

  arrow::compute::CountOptions options(arrow::compute::CountOptions::ONLY_VALID);

  auto aggregate_options = arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions{
      /*aggregates=*/{{"hash_count", &options}},
      /*targets=*/{"a"},
      /*names=*/{"count(a)"},
      /*keys=*/{"b"}};

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(cp::ExecNode * aggregate,
                            cp::MakeExecNode("aggregate", plan.get(), {source},
                            aggregate_options));

Aggregate example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Aggregate Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Aggregate Example)
  :linenos:

>   :lineno-match:

Author: I will work on additional example 👍

>   :lineno-match:

Author: additional example added

.. _stream_execution_sink_docs:

``sink``
--------

``sink`` operation provides output and is the final node of a streaming 
execution definition. :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions` interface is used to pass 
the required options. Similar to the source operator the sink operator exposes the output
with a function that returns a record batch future each time it is called.  It is expected the
caller will repeatedly call this function until the generator function is exhausted (returns
arrow::util::optional::nullopt).  If this function is not called often enough then record batches
will accumulate in memory.  An execution plan should only have one
"terminal" node (one sink node).  An execution plan may "finish" by marking

> `exec_plan->finished()` as complete before the sink generator is fully consumed and the

Reviewer: Though, this is kind of an internal detail: maybe just say something like "An ExecPlan can terminate early due to cancellation or an error, before the output is fully consumed. However, the plan can be safely destroyed independently of the sink, which will hold the unconsumed batches."

> `exec_plan->finished()` as complete before the sink generator is fully consumed and the

Author: Rephrased and added the idea.

execution plan can be safely destroyed without harming the sink generator (which will hold
references to the unconsumed batches).

Example::

  arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>> sink_gen;

  arrow::compute::ExecNode* sink;

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("sink", plan.get(), {source},

>                                                 arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions{&sink_gen}));

Author: Yeah, I understand what you are pointing out. May be since we add the excerpts, we can omit these.

>                                                 arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions{&sink_gen}));

Author: I removed similar excerpts like that.

      }

      arrow::Future<> Finish() override { return finish; }

      std::atomic<uint32_t> *batches_seen;
      arrow::Future<> finish;
      
  };
  
  std::shared_ptr<CustomSinkNodeConsumer> consumer =
          std::make_shared<CustomSinkNodeConsumer>(&batches_seen, finish);

  arrow::compute::ExecNode *consuming_sink;

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(consuming_sink, MakeExecNode("consuming_sink", plan.get(),
      {source}, cp::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions(consumer)));

Consuming-Sink example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: ConsumingSink Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: ConsumingSink Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_order_by_sink_docs:

``order_by_sink``
-----------------

``order_by_sink`` operation is an extension to the ``sink`` operation. 
This operation provides the ability to guarantee the ordering of the 
stream by providing the :class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`. 
Here the :class:`arrow::compute::SortOptions` are provided to define which columns 
are used for sorting and whether to sort by ascending or descending values.

> Note: This node is a "pipeline breaker" and will fully materialize the dataset in memory.

Author: removed similar ones.

In the future, spillover mechanisms will be added which should alleviate this constraint.

Example::

  arrow::compute::ExecNode *sink;

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink,
  arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("order_by_sink", plan.get(),
  {source}, 
  arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions{
  /*sort_options*/arrow::compute::SortOptions{
  {	arrow::compute::SortKey{
  //Column key(s) to order by and how to order by these sort keys.
  "a",
  // Sort Order
  arrow::compute::SortOrder::Descending 
  }}},&sink_gen}));

Order-By-Sink example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: OrderBySink Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: OrderBySink Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_select_k_docs:

``select_k_sink``
-----------------

> ``select_k_sink`` option enables selecting k number of elements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``select_k_sink`` option enables selecting the top/bottom K elements, similar to a SQL ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT K`` clause. 
```

:class:`arrow::compute::SelectKOptions` which is a defined by 
using :struct:`OrderBySinkNode` definition. This option returns a sink node that receives 
inputs and then compute top_k/bottom_k.

> Note: This node is a "pipeline breaker" and will fully materialize the input in memory.

Reviewer: Use `.. note::` here too

In the future, spillover mechanisms will be added which should alleviate this constraint.

Create SelectK Option::

  arrow::compute::SelectKOptions options = arrow::compute::SelectKOptions::TopKDefault(
              /*k=*/2, {"i32"});

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(
    arrow::compute::ExecNode * k_sink_node,
    arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("select_k_sink",
      plan.get(), {source},
      arrow::compute::SelectKSinkNodeOptions{options, &sink_gen}));

SelectK example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: KSelect Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: KSelect Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_scan_docs:

``scan``
---------

`scan` is an operation used to load and process datasets.  It should be preferred over the
more generic `source` node when your input is a dataset.  The behavior is defined using 
:class:`arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions`.  More information on datasets and the various

> scan options can be found in :ref:`dataset<cpp-dataset-reading>`.

Author: Make sense, it's neater. Haven't used it before. But suits well here. 👍 
Added it.

This node is capable of applying pushdown filters to the file readers which reduce
the amount of data that needs to be read.  This means you may supply the same
filter expression to the scan node that you also supply to the FilterNode because
the filtering is done in two different places.

Creating a Scan `ExecNode`::

  auto options = std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::ScanOptions>();
  options->use_async = true; 
  options->projection = Materialize({});  // create empty projection

  // construct the scan node
  cp::ExecNode* scan;
  auto scan_node_options = arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions{dataset, options};

  ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(scan,
                          cp::MakeExecNode("scan", plan.get(), {}, 
                            scan_node_options));

Scan example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Scan Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Scan Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_hashjoin_docs:

> ``hash_join``

Reviewer: nit, but maybe group `hash_join` with the non-sink nodes instead of putting it in the middle of the sink nodes here?

-------------

``hash_join`` operation provides the relational algebra operation, join using hash-based
algorithm. :class:`arrow::compute::HashJoinNodeOptions` contains the options required in 
defining a join. JoinType can be one of LEFT_SEMI, RIGHT_SEMI, LEFT_ANTI, RIGHT_ANTI,

> INNER, LEFT_OUTER, RIGHT_OUTER and FULL_OUTER. Also the join-key or by which column/s, 

Reviewer: Perhaps "hash_join supports left/right/full semi/anti/outerjoins"?

Reviewer: Also "The join key (i.e. the column(s) to join on)" reads a bit more smoothly, I think

> and output suffixes can be set via the the join options. 

Reviewer: What is an output suffix?

Author: Perhaps 

"The hash_join supports left/right/full semi/anti/outerjoins. 
Also the join-key (i.e. the column(s) to join on), and suffixes (i.e a suffix term like "_x"
which can be appended as a suffix for column names duplicated in both left and right 
relations.) can be set via the the join options." ?

Reviewer: Thanks, I'd say we should explain that in a little more detail (or just omit it) since I don't think this is a standard feature of joins (at least in SQL, I may be wrong)

Author: Let me add a little more details.
Is it okay if we include external resources like peer reviewed papers, wiki pages, standard docs as helper materials?

Reviewer: Yes, totally fine. (And I might just be ignorant of this if it's a common option.)

Author: Great, I will add more details to this.

Author: References and links added.

Hash-Join example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: HashJoin Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: HashJoin Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_write_docs:

``write``
---------

``write`` option enables writing a result to supported file formats (example `parquet`,
`feather`, `csv`, etc). 
The write options are provided via the :class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions` and 
defined using :class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions`. Here the 
:class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions` contains the meta-data required 

> to write the data. 

Reviewer: Perhaps

```
The ``write`` node saves query results as a dataset of files in a
format like Parquet, Feather, CSV, etc. using the :doc:`./dataset`
functionality in Arrow. The write options are provided via the
:class:`arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions` which in turn contains
:class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions`.
:class:`arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions` provides
control over the written dataset, including options like the output
directory, file naming scheme, and so on.
```

Author: Neat 👍

Write example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Write Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Write Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_union_docs:

``union``
-------------

``union`` is operation performs the union of two datasets. 
The union operation can be executed on multiple data 
sources(:class:`ExecNodes`).

The following example demonstrates how this can be achieved using 
two data sources.

Union example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../cpp/examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc
  :language: cpp
  :start-after: (Doc section: Union Example)
  :end-before: (Doc section: Union Example)
  :linenos:
  :lineno-match:

.. _stream_execution_example_list_docs:

Example List
============

> There are examples of these nodes which can be found in ``examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc``

Reviewer: Though, this list is pretty redundant with the list above, and as mentioned above, it might be nice to just include the example in its entirety.

> There are examples of these nodes which can be found in ``examples/arrow/execution_plan_documentation_examples.cc``

Author: Yep, I just added it as an easy way to navigate through the examples, but since there is a menu in the right hand side, this is redundant in use and content-wise. Removing and settling for the simpler description suggested.

To construct such queries, we have provided a set of building blocks
or referred as :class:`ExecNode` s. These nodes provide the ability to 
construct operations like filtering, projection, join, etc. 

This is the list of :class:`ExecutionNode` s exposed;

1. :class:`SourceNode`
2. :class:`FilterNode`
3. :class:`ProjectNode`
4. :class:`ScalarAggregateNode`
5. :class:`SinkNode`
6. :class:`ConsumingSinkNode`
7. :struct:`OrderBySinkNode`
8. SelectK-SinkNode
9. Scan-Node
10. :class:`HashJoinNode`
11. Write-Node
12. :class:`UnionNode`

There are a set of :class:`ExecNode` s designed to provide various operations required
in designing a streaming execution plan. 

``SourceNode``
--------------

:struct:`arrow::compute::SourceNode` can be considered as an entry point to create a streaming execution plan. 
A source node can be constructed as follows.

:class:`arrow::compute::SoureNodeOptions` are used to create the :struct:`arrow::compute::SourceNode`. 
The :class:`Schema` of the data passing through and a function to generate data 
`std::function<arrow::Future<arrow::util::optional<arrow::compute::ExecBatch>>()>` 
are required to create this option::

    // data generator

>     arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>> gen() { ... }

Reviewer: I think that's ok then, but it might be nice to explain that this represents a generator, since it may not otherwise be clear that you should expect to call the std::function repeatedly.

    
    // data schema 
    auto schema = arrow::schema({...})
    
    // source node options
    auto source_node_options = arrow::compute::SourceNodeOptions{schema, gen};
    
    // create a source node
    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(arrow::compute::ExecNode * source,
                            arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("source", plan.get(), {}, 
                            source_node_options));

``FilterNode``
--------------

:class:`FilterNode`, as the name suggests, provide a container to define a data filtering criteria. 
Filter can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`. For instance if the row values
of a particular column needs to be filtered by a boundary value, ex: all values of column b
greater than 3, can be written using :class:`arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions` as follows::

    // a > 3
    arrow::compute::Expression filter_opt = arrow::compute::greater(
                                  arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), 

> 																	arrow::compute::literal(3));

Author: I think I have added an additional tab or 2. Misunderstood that the tabs are required to highlight the code. 
I fixed it through out the rest of the code snippets.

Using this option, the filter node can be constructed as follows::																

    // creating filter node
    arrow::compute::ExecNode* filter;
      ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(filter, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("filter", 
                            // plan
                            plan.get(),
                            // previous input
                            {scan}, 
                            //filter node options
                            arrow::compute::FilterNodeOptions{filter_opt}));

``ProjectNode``
---------------

:class:`ProjectNode` executes expressions on input batches and produces new batches. 
Each expression will be evaluated against each batch which is pushed to this 

> node to produce a corresponding output column. This is exposed via 

Reviewer 2: This wording is a little confusing to me.  Expressions do not create batches.  The output of the expressions is arrays.  Maybe something like:

```
:class:`ProjectNode` rearranges, deletes, transforms, and creates columns.
Each output column is computed by evaluating an expression
against the source record batch.  This is exposed via...
```

:class:`arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions` component which requires, 

> a :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`, names of the project columns (names are not provided, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a :class:`arrow::compute::Expression`, names for the output columns (names are not provided, 
```

the string representations of exprs will be used) and a boolean flag to determine 
synchronous/asynchronous nature (by default asynchronous option is set to `true`). 

Sample Expression for projection::

    // a * 2 (multiply values in a column by 2)
    arrow::compute::Expression a_times_2 = arrow::compute::call("multiply", 
							{arrow::compute::field_ref("a"), arrow::compute::literal(2)});

Creating a project node::

    arrow::compute::ExecNode *project;
        ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(project, 
            arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("project", 
            // plan
            plan.get(),
            // previous node 
            {scan},
            // project node options 
            arrow::compute::ProjectNodeOptions{{a_times_2}}));

``ScalarAggregateNode``
-----------------------

:class:`ScalarAggregateNode` is an :class:`ExecNode` which provides various 
aggregation options. The :class:`arrow::compute::AggregateNodeOptions` provides the 
container to define the aggregation criterion. These options can be 
selected from `arrow::compute` options. 

1. `ScalarAggregateOptions`

> In this aggregation mode, using option, `skip_nulls` the null values are ignored.

Reviewer 2: "In this aggregation mode"...

What is an aggregation mode?

Author: removed these content and linked to existing aggregation docs.

            names.emplace_back(aug_name);
            }
        }

        std::vector<arrow::compute::Expression> exprs;
        for (const auto& name : names) {
            exprs.push_back(arrow::compute::field_ref(name));
        }

        return arrow::compute::project(exprs, names);
    }

    auto options = std::make_shared<arrow::dataset::ScanOptions>();
    // sync scanning is not supported by ScanNode
    options->use_async = true;
    options->projection = Materialize({});  // create empty projection

    // construct the scan node
    cp::ExecNode* scan;
    auto scan_node_options = arrow::dataset::ScanNodeOptions{
                              /*dataset*/dataset, 
                              /*scan_options*/options};

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(scan,
                            arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("scan", 
                              plan.get(), 
                              {}, 
                              scan_node_options));

``SinkNode``
------------

:class:`SinkNode` can be considered as the output or final node of an streaming 
execution definition. :class:`arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions` interface is used to pass 

> the required options. Requires 

Reviewer 2: Might be worth mentioning that an exec plan should only have one "terminal" node.  I don't think we actually prevent this but "bad things may happen someday"

`std::function<arrow::Future<arrow::util::optional<arrow::compute::ExecBatch>>()>* generator`
and `arrow::util::BackpressureOptions backpressure`. 

Example::

    arrow::AsyncGenerator<arrow::util::optional<cp::ExecBatch>> sink_gen;

    arrow::compute::ExecNode* sink;

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink, arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("sink", plan.get(), {source},
                                                  arrow::compute::SinkNodeOptions{&sink_gen}));

> The output can be obtained as a table::

Reviewer 2: Not for this PR but I wonder if we might want to someday just create a `to_table` sink node which hides the complexity of aysnc generators.  The user could just use a scan node as input and a ToTableNode as output and never be aware of any of that.

Author: I think it is a nice idea. It will be very useful for the high level C++ users.

Author: I would like to work on it, if we are moving for such a functionality.

        
    };
    
    std::shared_ptr<CustomSinkNodeConsumer> consumer =
            std::make_shared<CustomSinkNodeConsumer>(&batches_seen, finish);

    arrow::compute::ExecNode *consuming_sink;

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(consuming_sink, MakeExecNode("consuming_sink", plan.get(),
        {source}, cp::ConsumingSinkNodeOptions(consumer)));

``OrderBySinkNode``
-------------------

This is an extension to the :class:`SinkNode` definition and provides the ability
to guarantee the ordering of the stream by providing the,
:class:`arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions`. 
Here the :class:`arrow::compute::SortOptions` are provided to define which columns 
are used for sorting and under which criterion.

Example::

    arrow::compute::ExecNode *sink;

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(sink,
    arrow::compute::MakeExecNode("order_by_sink", plan.get(),
    {source}, 
    arrow::compute::OrderBySinkNodeOptions{
    /*sort_options*/arrow::compute::SortOptions{
    {	arrow::compute::SortKey{
    //Column key(s) to order by and how to order by these sort keys.
    "a",
    // Sort Order
    arrow::compute::SortOrder::Descending 
    }}},&sink_gen}));

SelectK-Node
------------

> There is no Select-K-SinkNode available as an entity within the source, but the behavior 

Reviewer 2: Since the "node classes" themselves are really an implementation detail we don't need to call out the fact that a node doesn't actually exist or that we are reusing a node.

Author: Yes, @lidavidm also mentioned previously. The nodes will be removed and we will only document the 
options and mention them as operations instead of nodes, "scan", "source", etc.

    arrow::dataset::FileSystemDatasetWriteOptions write_options;
    write_options.file_write_options = format->DefaultWriteOptions();
    write_options.filesystem = filesystem;
    write_options.base_dir = base_path;
    write_options.partitioning = partitioning;
    write_options.basename_template = "part{i}.parquet";

    arrow::dataset::WriteNodeOptions write_node_options {write_options,
    dataset->schema()};

Creating a `write` `ExecNode`::

    ARROW_ASSIGN_OR_RAISE(cp::ExecNode *wr, cp::MakeExecNode("write", plan.get(),
        {scan}, write_node_options));

    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(wr->Validate());
    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(plan->Validate());
    // // // start the ExecPlan
    ABORT_ON_FAILURE(plan->StartProducing());
    plan->finished().Wait(); // make sure to add this method 

``UnionNode``
-------------

:class:`UnionNode` is the :class:`ExecNode` interface to perform a union 
operation on two datasets. The union operation can be executed
on multiple data sources(:class:`ExecNodes`).

The following example demonstrates how this can be achieved using 
two data sources. Following a union operations the output is obtained using 

> a aggregation operation. 

Reviewer 2: Why include the aggregation operation here?

Author: Replaced by referring to the existing docs.

Reviewer 2: I think I wasn't clear enough.  Why do you need an aggregate node in the example for union?  It seems you could just have Source -> Union -> Sink
